[Data] Add key concepts to and revise "Data Internals" page (#44751)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/data/data-internals.rst

.. _dataset_concept:

Key concepts
============

Datasets and blocks
-------------------

Datasets
~~~~~~~~

:class:`Dataset <ray.data.Dataset>` is the main user-facing Python API. It represents a 
distributed data collection, and defines data loading and processing operations. You 
typically use the API like this:

> 1. Create a Dataset from external storage or in-memory data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a Ray Dataset from external storage or in-memory data.
```

2. Apply transformations to the data. 
3. Write the outputs to external storage or feed the outputs to training workers. 

Blocks
~~~~~~

A *block* is the basic unit of data bulk that Ray Data stores in the object store and 
transfers over the network. Each block contains a disjoint subset of rows, and Ray Data 
loads and transforms these blocks in parallel. 

The following figure visualizes a dataset with three blocks, each holding 1000 rows.

> The :class:`~ray.data.Dataset` is held on the driver while materialized blocks are 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray Data holds the :class:`~ray.data.Dataset` on the driver and stores the  materialized blocks
```

> Ray Data holds the :class:`~ray.data.Dataset` on the driver and stores the materialized 

Reviewer 2: * `on the driver` -> `on the process that triggers execution, which is usually the driver.`
* `stores the materialized blocks`: remove `materialized`? it sounds like we only store the results of "materialize` in the object store.

> stored as objects in Ray's shared-memory :ref:`object store <objects-in-ray>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as objects in Ray's shared-memory :ref:`object store <objects-in-ray>`.
```

.. image:: images/dataset-arch.svg

..
  https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1PmbDvHRfVthme9XD7EYM-LIHPXtHdOfjCbc1SCsM64k/edit

Block formats
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Blocks are Arrow tables or pandas DataFrames. Generally, blocks are Arrow tables unless 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blocks are Arrow tables or `pandas` DataFrames. Generally, blocks are Arrow tables unless 
```

unless Arrow can’t represent your data. 

The block format doesn’t affect the type of data returned by APIs like 
:meth:`~ray.data.Dataset.iter_batches`.

Block size limiting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ray Data bounds block sizes to avoid excessive communication overhead and prevent 
out-of-memory errors. Small blocks are good for latency and more streamed execution, 
while large blocks reduce scheduler and communication overhead. The default range 
attempts to make a good tradeoff for most jobs.

By default, Ray Data attempts to bound block sizes between 1 MiB and 128 MiB. If a block 
is larger than 192 MiB (50% more than the upper bound), Ray Data splits the block into 

> smaller blocks. 

Reviewer 2: add how to set these configs.

stateful objects that describe “how” to do it. An example of a logical operator is 
``ReadOp``, and an example of a physical operator is ``TaskPoolMapOperator``.

Plans
~~~~~

A *logical plan* is a series of logical operators, and a *physical plan* is a series of 
physical operators. When you call APIs like :func:`ray.data.read_images` and 
:meth:`ray.data.Dataset.map_batches`, Ray Data produces a logical plan. When execution 
starts, the planner generates a corresponding physical plan. 

The planner
~~~~~~~~~~~

The Ray Data planner translates logical operators to one or more physical operators. For 
example, the planner translates the ``ReadOp`` logical operator into two physical 
operators: an ``InputDataBuffer`` and ``TaskPoolMapOperator``. Whereas the ``ReadOp``
logical operator only describes the input data, the ``TaskPoolMapOperator`` physical 
operator actually launches tasks to read the data.

Plan optimization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ray Data applies optimizations to both logical and physical plans. For example, the 
``OperatorFusionRule`` combines a chain of physical map operators into a single map 

> operator. This prevents unnecessary serialization between map operators.

Reviewer 2: add how to set optimization rules

Author: Don't think we expose a functioning API to configure optimization rules. `add_user_provided_logical_rules` and `add_user_provided_physical_rules` don't do anything.

I think you can configure `ray.data._internal.logical.optimizers.DEFAULT_LOGICAL_RULES`, but that seems more of a hack.

Types of physical operators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Physical operators take in a stream of block references and output another stream of 
block references. Some physical operators launch Ray Tasks and Actors to transform  

> the blocks, and others only manipulate the references

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the blocks, and others only manipulate the references.
```

``MapOperator`` is the most common operator. All read, transform, and write operations 
are implemented with it. To process data, ``MapOperator`` implementations use either Ray 
Tasks or Ray Actors.

Non-map operators include ``OutputSplitter`` and ``LimitOperator``. These two operators 
manipulate references to data, but don’t launch tasks or modify the underlying data. 

Execution
---------

The executor
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The *executor* schedules tasks and moves data between physical operators.

> The executor and operators are located on the driver process, except for training jobs 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The executor and operators are located on the driver process, except for training jobs,
```

> The executor and operators are located on the driver process, except for training jobs, 

Reviewer 2: ditto. worth mentioning that the executor and operators are created on the process where dataset execution starts. for batch inference jobs, the process is usually the driver. while users can also pass the Dataset object to any Ray actors or tasks and trigger execution there. for training jobs, the executor runs on a special actor called SplitCoordinator which is also responsible for handling `streaming_split`.

> where they're located on a special actor called ``SplitCoordinator``. Tasks and actors 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are located on a special actor called ``SplitCoordinator``. Ray Data schedules tasks and actors 
```

> launched by operators are scheduled across the cluster, and outputs are stored in Ray’s 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
launched by operators across the cluster, and store outputs in Ray’s 
```
